[Music]
okay fellow air travelers I've got a
question for you what's your favorite
time during a flight the takeoff the
landing or maybe the moment your plane
climbs just above the clouds
ah the view is magical but have you ever
wondered what would happen if your plane
starts to climb even higher well it's
time to get some answers but first
please drop a comment below and let me
know if you ever want to fly at higher
altitudes there are three main reasons
why airplanes fly as high as they do one
has to do with of course saving money
the higher it flies the faster it goes
and the cheaper it is air molecules are
responsible for that when a plane flies
higher less air is pushing down from
above therefore the air molecules spread
out more decreasing the airs density boy
I wish someone would decrease my density
when an aircraft flies through less air
molecules it needs to adjust its speed
in order to get enough air and lift
itself a lack of speed and air can cause
the plane to end up in a dangerous stall
no not the kind of stall with wild
horses in it the other kind but I'll
come back to that in a bit
that's when knots come into play
actually you don't play with these kinds
of knots like on a rope here a knot is
the unit used to measure wind speed
imagine you're climbing right above
4,000 feet you can see in the meter that
the airspeed is 250 knots when you reach
38,000 feet and you check the airspeed
again it's still 250 knots but when we
check the true airspeed of the plane
which measures how fast air is going
through the engine it's up to 450 knots
so when the plane travels rapidly at
higher altitudes it consumes less fuel
while taking you to your destination
faster it's a win-win
another reason is comfort jet airliners
usually fly at 35,000 to 42,000 feet the
weather that we experience every day is
active from the ground up to
approximately 35,000 feet you see where
this is going
all the turbulence clouds rain and bad
weather in general stay below the
plane's altitude so we can enjoy a
smooth non-eventful flight the last and
most important reason is everyone's
safety let's say that the plane is at
39,000 feet and suddenly something
happens to the engines pilots have more
time to fix the problem and communicate
with the controllers before they make an
emergency landing all modern aircraft
have an excellent response when there's
an engine failure most of us think that
if an aircraft loses its engines it'll
drop like a pin falls onto the floor
fortunately it's not how it works when
an aircraft loses an engine
it'll glide for each meter it drops it
moves 53 to 56 feet forward during that
period pilots have plenty of time to get
closer to an airport and perform an
emergency landing so now that we know
flying higher is more relaxed more
economic and safer wouldn't it make more
sense if an airliner flew even higher
and faster well it's a bit more
complicated than that
as I told you earlier the airspeed of
the plane will increase as the air
molecules drop one of the main reasons a
jet can't fly higher is because there
won't be enough air flowing through its
engine think of a real person visiting
Mount Everest the higher they climb the
less air they get into their lungs
without enough oxygen the human body
can't function the same principle
applies to the aircraft engine it needs
enough oxygen to get mixed up with the
fuel molecules to burn and produce
thrust when the air density decreases
the engine thrust does the same we
imagine the first time you boarded a
plane when that beast was on the ground
you could hear his engines overworking
but when the same aircraft climbs above
35,000 feet
the engines barely produce enough thrust
maintain the plane's altitude
temperature can also be a problem when
it's a good 77 degrees on the ground it
can drop down to minus 60 degrees at
high altitudes and with the temperature
lowering the speed of sound gets
impacted as well so the true airspeed
comes to stir things up when both the
speed of sound and temperature drop in
high altitudes the true airspeed will
increase and at some point they'll meet
that's what pilots call the coffin
corner and it's as dangerous as it
sounds if a plane reaches that point and
it decelerates it'll go into a low-speed
stall if it goes faster it'll end up in
a high-speed stall neither of those are
safe all aircraft have a critical Mach
number which describes the speed of an
object approaching the speed of sound
when that Mach number is reached the
airplane travels at supersonic speeds
and it can break the sound barrier
planes usually fly at around Mach 0.7 or
seventy percent of the speed of sound if
an aircraft goes faster than that it can
cause shockwaves to form these
shockwaves in turn will create a huge
drag at different parts of the plane
this can result in pushing the nose of
the plane upwards if all these events
happen in the coffin corner it'll break
the aircraft into pieces that's one of
the reasons why pilots aren't allowed to
take the aircraft past their designated
Mach rate
granted there are some planes intended
to reach supersonic speeds but they were
created for research and military
purposes at certain altitudes an
aircraft has a minimum speed limit and a
maximum speed limit in order to be safe
aviators fly the plane approximately 600
feet below its maximum altitude though
sometimes the unexpected happens and
pilots should know how to handle those
situations when a plane reaches either
of those points let's say that an
airliner flies at a higher altitude but
lower speeds which is a rare occurrence
but for the sake of the argument let's
assume that the pilots are playing chess
and not paying attention the plane won't
start to lose speed on its own but if
there's a problem with the throttle or
it fails then it'll begin to slow down
the first thing that'll happen is that
the aircraft will warn the pilots using
voice commands and loud alarms then the
pilots will need to act immediately as
the aircraft goes slower the drag
increases the slower the jet goes the
more thrust it needs to be controlled as
the drag continues to rise the plane
could reach its maximum safe velocity
and everyone on the jet will feel the
impact immediately the airliner will
start to shake the wings of the plane
will begin to stall followed by alarming
turbulence the pilots need to act fast
they should be able to identify the
stall and get the plane out of it during
that time the airplanes nose is lifted
and the wings are going against the wind
at an angle that can cause them to break
first they need to disengage the
autopilot this will stop it from
correcting the position of the plane
then they'll begin to lower the nose of
the plane downwards while doing so
they'll add a little thrust to the
action when it's lowered enough they add
a bit more thrust to help the plane go
faster part of their training is to do
these things slowly and steadily to
avoid having a second stall when it's
all done the pilots will have full
control of the plane and they can
continue playing chess but the way they
save a plane when it's approaching
supersonic speeds is a whole different
story and this is actually a bit more
common let's say that an aircraft is
flying over the Alps the change in
temperatures impacts the airspeed the
plane will again alert the pilots but
depending on the situation the most
likely won't disengage the autopilot
then they'll partially apply the brake
while doing so they'll make sure that
they don't go all the way to idle
because the low airflow can cause the
engines to stall for a whole minute
so they slowly bring the thrust back al
it
bed and gradually raise the air brakes
everything is done in slow movements
because a sudden change can cause shock
waves that will roll the plane then the
pilots make sure that the planes speed
is decelerating and at the same pace
they lower the air brakes so guys now
you know how to fly a plane all kidding
aside high altitudes speed and the
coffin corner play a huge role in our
safety now we have a clear understanding
of how pilots might be saving everyone's
life during a flight without even
realizing hey if you learn something new
today then give the video a like and
share it with a friend and here are some
other videos I think you'll enjoy just
click to the left or right and remember
stay on the bright side of life